Group: Cameron Stepanski, xxx, xxx, xxx
CS 2315 – Computer Ethics
Dr. Vasant C. Ramkumar
November 24, 2020
Abstract
	Net neutrality is the equal treatment of all Internet traffic by Internet service providers. These providers have pushed for more regulation of the Internet and advocate for a tiered system that prioritizes online traffic based on which paid service a company or user has. Rule Utilitarianism is a workable ethical theory that prioritizes the greatest good something can bring to society. Using this theory, net neutrality is a net positive and should be protected. Net neutrality allows for the equal treatment of consumers regardless of income or class or ability to pay, protects smaller companies from unregulated competition from much larger companies, and manifests into a more equitable society outside of the Internet.

Final Paper
Introduction
	Network neutrality was first coined by Tim Wu, a law professor from Columbia University, in a 2003 thesis ‘Network Neutrality, Broadband Discrimination’ about online discrimination. At the time, certain broadband providers banned Internet users from utilizing virtual private networks (VPNs) and some even restricted any use of Wi-Fi routers. But the main idea behind instating net neutrality is to prevent Internet Service Providers (ISPs) from charging Internet platforms a fee for prioritized traffic. Wu explained that net neutrality is the principle that ISPs must treat all Internet communications equally and provide the same opportunities for all websites, platforms, applications, and any other method of communication. Those in favor of net neutrality argue that this principle allows the Internet to be a level playing field for Internet services by promoting freedom of expression, innovation, competition, and unrestrained access for a range of platforms. Many believe that we should continue to have a free and open Internet. They believe that this is the reason why the Internet has developed so quickly over the past 20 years and it has benefited everybody in the online ecosystem overall. Having unrestricted freedoms means that there are no bounds when it comes to creativity and innovation, especially for newer competitors and freelancers. Many entrepreneurs started as freelancers and upscaled their ideas exponentially with the help of a completely free and open Internet system. Some may argue that without net neutrality, users can pay for the services they specifically use, Internet “fast lanes” will be possible and potentially save lives, and Internet services have more flexibility with network innovation by extending their service availability and networks. Wu noted in his thesis that net neutrality “doesn't suggest every network has to be neutral to be useful.” And that “private networks can be extremely useful for other purposes.” He explained that the principle suggests that there is such a thing as a neutral public network, which has a particular value that depends on its neutral nature. With that in mind, larger platforms would gain a huge advantage with net neutrality due to having more resources to reserve more broadband. In the eyes of an Internet startup platform, for example, this would create a huge disadvantage to compete and thrive against larger platforms. On the other hand, the biggest winner when it comes to net neutrality are ISPs like AT&T, Verizon, etc. ISPs, with net neutrality, can charge fees to speed up data transfers through its network for those who can afford it consistently. Large content providers like Google and Amazon would reap the benefits of this to ensure their advantage online due to a seemingly bottomless reserve of assets. Since this topic applies to a broad scope of people in society, we will analyze these claims using Rule Utilitarianism. This form of utilitarianism says an action is right as it conforms to a rule that leads to the greatest good or that “the rightness or wrongness of a particular action is a function of the correctness of the rule of which it is an instance.” We will conclude if the permanent adoption of net neutrality will lead to the greatest increase in total happiness to society or if the harm outweighs the good overall.
Issue/Problem
The main debate over net neutrality has really been centered around Internet companies being able to monetize different types of Internet usage in different amounts, preventing certain users/platforms from having equal access across the Internet. Over the last couple of decades there have been two different sides of the net neutrality argument that have developed. We are going to talk about the issues that both sides have with net neutrality, particularly the potential issues/benefits that both sides offer in the form of legislation or lack thereof. These groups can be classified as proponents of net neutrality and opponents of net neutrality, with each side having their own opinions on issues around the existence of net neutrality.
Proponents of net neutrality include big tech companies, people that use the Internet to streamline their content, as well as human rights organizations and other consumer advocacy groups. Proponents of net neutrality argue that net neutrality has the potential to provide protection against discrimination based on the type of Internet usage that takes place.  Different types of Internet use include streaming content such as Netflix and YouTube, online shopping, and email There are also a variety of companies big and small on the other side of this content that use it as a means of growth. Without net neutrality companies potentially have the ability to acquire priority access within the Internet landscape, meaning that companies have the ability to pay service providers directly for faster and more reliable access. For larger companies, such as Google or Spotify, this gives them an advantage in the marketplace that a smaller company couldn’t possibly obtain. This makes it particularly harder for competition in the Internet marketplace to arise, creating the potential for larger companies to monopolize themselves within their marketplace, deterring innovation and variety.  Internet service providers can also charge additional fees to connect to certain services, making it harder to access these services, when consumers are already paying the companies directly for their product. They can also throttle the speeds of these services making them unusable, promoting a difficult environment for users. All in all, the arguments of inequality of access between people to certain parts of the Internet, unequal opportunities between companies that use the Internet as a platform to spread their content/services, throttling the speeds of users based on their traffic type, make up the reasons for net neutrality. 
Opponents of net neutrality include Internet service providers (ISPs) as well as the companies that build out the infrastructure. The main argument against net neutrality is that there should be different tiers of service based on need. A potential benefit of tiered service is a reduction in cost if users only pay for the service they need, for example someone that only uses the Internet for basic web browsing and doesn’t use something high-bandwidth such as streaming video, which makes up over a third of total bandwidth across the Internet, could see a potential cost reduction in their service fees. The increased fees associated with this certain usage from either company expanding their speeds or people for specific usage would create more profit for the Internet service providers. This profit in turn, according to providers, makes it easier for them to build out the necessary infrastructure for expanding/upgrading their networks, creating a healthier competition amongst service providers specifically and generally higher speeds and reliability for users in general. All in all, the issues that opponents of net neutrality have are that it creates a lack of incentive for investment in infrastructure, tiered service has the potential to promote competition between Internet service providers if there is a need for greater bandwidth which could accelerate improvements in the quality of Internet service across the board, which means higher Internet speeds for users.
Technical Background
Net Neutrality began to develop in the early 2000’s as an idea in order to prevent Internet service providers from discriminating against the type of traffic as well as technology that was used across the Internet. The term Net Neutrality was first coined in 2003 by Tim Wu who wrote about Internet discrimination. The ideology behind net neutrality is that an open Internet drives the American economy and serves, every day, as a critical tool for America's citizens to conduct commerce, communicate, educate, entertain, and engage in the world around them. It should also be open for commerce, innovation, and speech. 
There are a variety of instances when broadband companies were seen acting against the ideology behind net neutrality mentioned above, resulting in government action/policy. In the early 2000’s most Internet service providers prevented their users from setting up their own VPNs as well as their own Wi-Fi routers (this is what really kicked off the net neutrality movement). In 2005 an ISP in North Carolina was fined by the FCC (Federal Communications Commission) for preventing its users from making phone calls over the Internet. Comcast in 2008 throttled bit torrent connections over its network and was ordered by the FCC to stop. The issue of companies being able to throttle or block certain usage of the Internet became apparent and was recognized by the government. The last few presidential administrations have had the greatest impact on net neutrality, pushing its aspects/policy through in the form of legislation as a result of these violations. 
The first attempt at creating an anti-discriminatory environment was under the Bush administration.  The FCC at the time put a policy forth that prohibited Internet service providers from blocking legal content over the Internet. This policy also prevented service providers from blocking their users from using their own devices that connect to the Internet. 
In 2010, under the Obama administration, the FCC passed The Open Internet Order, which formally prevented the blocking of legal content and devices, required the transparency of broadband companies on their network practices, and prevents the unreasonable discrimination of the transmission of legal network traffic. In 2015, The Open Internet Order was expanded, classifying ISPs as a common carrier under the 1934 Communications Act, establishing it as a public good that shouldn’t be charged at unreasonable rates. This made it easier for the government to regulate the Internet under law.
Under the Trump administration, the Open Internet Order was rescinded, and the FCC put the restoring the Internet Freedom Act into place. The Restoring Internet Freedom Act has three main components:  consumer protection, transparency, and removal of regulations to promote investment. The new policy essentially places the responsibility of policing the broadband companies on the Federal Trade Commission and with the policy from the 2015 Internet order not being in effect, there are really no formal rules/laws of net neutrality that would be considered illegal if broken. The only real rule is that broadband companies are required to be fully transparent with their network management practices. 
Ethical Analysis
Rule Utilitarianism uses the principle of Utility and applies it to moral rules. The conduct rule is determined by finding the value of the consequences and the best overall consequence is the best rule. Moral rules and decisions require utilitarianism calculus to be performed for exceptional situations, it can avoid the problem of moral luck as well as the problem of bias amongst others. It appeals to the widespread moral interests of society, it is a workable theory if done correctly and benefits a vast majority, all measured on a single scale that must be the general principles of utility are that the general action of anything is good if the benefits exceed the harm as if it harms exceed its benefits. The main principle of Utility is an object’s tendency to produce happiness or prevents unhappiness for an individual or community. The benefits of happiness are the advantages of it being a good thing and equaling an overall satisfaction of pleasure. The importance of this theory being practiced accordingly is crucial because not many other theories ensure the premises of free and accessible Internet for all. 
 The Internet is a tool that can benefit all of society – from poor to rich. Anyone who knows how to access specific resources and knowledge can use it to their benefits. The ability for everyone to use the Internet is key to the total overall satisfaction and happiness it creates. The importance of acknowledging that the Internet is something that cannot be regulated or limited to the general public is the most important aspect of net-neutrality. Not all have the luxury of others like having Wi-Fi or even a functioning computer, and for there to be more limits to this luxury defeats the overall objective of creating the maximum amount of pleasure for society. For this theory, net neutrality states that it should be free to all and that all should have the opportunity to access the Internet. Any class or any person's income should not limit what they can learn or use on the Internet, by allowing limits on the usage of the Internet it can cause an imbalance in social classes if it was excluding others at all. The overall best outcome would be to allow it to be free and accessible to all, it would be the most important aspect of the Rule of Utilitarianism which is the best outcome for pleasure. 
If companies were to have net neutrality lifted, Internet service providers would make a tremendous profit off of the fees for tiered services off of their consumers. The Internet would be regulated a huge amount and wouldn't follow the Rule of Utilitarianism at all because the overall outcome to the situation would not give an overall pleasure to society, in fact would give a pain to society by not following the moral rules. Everyone would have to pay a fee to Internet service providers and it would give companies more control over their consumers. On top of the regulations of not having net neutrality, there would be a limitation of freedom of speech and the things that can be done by an everyday person who would use the Internet for entertainment purposes or for any sort of purposes.
There should be an open competition for all types of companies – small or large. This would level the playing field and companies would compete to get consumer’s attention. It would be more family friendly to everyone and introduces a way for there to be guidelines on companies on how others would use the Internet, for the time they use it to be freer. The competition for consumers attention would benefit everyone because it brings order and reassurance to the consumers and leaves the Internet service providers to be left with the job to satisfy the consumers of the Internet at the same time profiting in a controlled manner by net neutrality. By following the Rule of Utilitarianism, we would have a safe and workable theory when it comes to net neutrality, there would be a safe manner for the usage of the Internet for consumers and a firm set of guidelines for companies to not infringe on free and accessible Internet for all. 
Conclusion
	As the Internet has become more ingrained in society and its use more essential to our survival and a necessity to carry out our everyday tasks, the topic of net neutrality has taken a more prominent role in the public discourse. Net neutrality has been debated for decades now. In the United States, each presidential administration has implemented and handled the issue differently. One can assume that the debate will continue in the coming years and will grow into more of a hot button issue. The Internet and how we choose to use it has come to help define who we are as human beings. Laws that promote and protect equality online regardless of which services we can and do pay for are essential to help maintain equality outside of the digital realm. Smaller companies should have the same playing field online that larger companies do and should not be stifled because they can’t pay large sums of money to stay higher in a hierarchy that is based on who’s willing to pay more. Opponents of net neutrality claim that tiered services offer many benefits. These services could provide “fast lanes” for industries such as telemedicine and could potentially save lives. These services could also be adapted to how much an individual uses the Internet. Those that use large amounts of data and bandwidth would have a different plan than someone who uses the Internet sparingly and rarely needs the bandwidth to stream video. The fees collected by Internet service providers that have a tiered system could be used to upgrade and maintain infrastructure. Despite all of these potential benefits, a free and equal Internet would benefit society overall much more. The workable ethical theory of Rule Utilitarianism helps to illustrate this. Net neutrality allows everyone to access the same content online regardless of income or class. The fees that would be implemented in a tiered service system would disproportionately benefit Internet service providers and would widen the gap in income equality that has only grown wider in recent years. Net neutrality promotes more competition among companies which leads to better products and services at lower costs. The benefits to society from net neutrality far exceed the harms of it – no “fast lanes”, no tiered-services, and no extra fees to help upgrade and maintain telecommunications infrastructure. The Internet without net neutrality would grow into an extension of the world outside of it – divided by class and income where large companies can throw around their weight with their money. The Internet started as a place to innovate and express oneself freely. Net neutrality protects these characteristics and should be protected for the good of humanity.
Bibliography
2010 Open Internet Rules. (2018, January 10). Retrieved November 24, 2020, from 	https://www.benton.org/content/2010-open-internet-rules
Danielle Dean, K. (n.d.). The Debate Over Net Neutrality. Retrieved November 24, 2020, from 	https://www.ncsl.org/research/telecommunications-and-information-technology/the-	debate-over-net-neutrality.aspx
Falcon, E. (2019, February 21). The Public Deserves a Return to the 2015 Open Internet Order. 	Retrieved November 03, 2020, from https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2019/02/public-	deserves-return-2015-open-internet-order
Finley, K. (n.d.). Net Neutrality: Here's Everything You Need to Know. Retrieved November 23, 2020, from https://www.wired.com/story/guide-net-neutrality/
Is Net Neutrality Ethical from a Utilitarian Framework. (n.d.). Retrieved November 23, 2020, from https://www.utilitarianism.com/ruleutil.htm https://uconnbusinessethics.wordpress.com/2015/02/13/is-net-neutrality-ethical-from-a-utilitarian-framework/
Kastrenakes, J. (2015, March 12). These are the FCC's full rules for protecting net neutrality. Retrieved November 03, 2020, from https://www.theverge.com/2015/3/12/8116237/net-neutrality-rules-open-internet-order-released
Net Neutrality. (2020, November 09). Retrieved November 24, 2020, from https://www.publicknowledge.org/issues/net-neutrality/
Pensworth, L., Written by: Luke Pensworth, & Luke is the managing editor and site manager of Dailywireless. As a wireless enthusiast/consumer. (2020, March 07). Everything about Net Neutrality in 2020: History, Impacts and Future. Retrieved November 23, 2020, from https://dailywireless.org/internet/net-neutrality-history-present-impacts-and-future/
Protecting and Promoting the Open Internet. (2015, April 13). Retrieved November 03, 2020, from https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2015/04/13/2015-07841/protecting-and-promoting-the-open-internet
Restoring Internet Freedom. (2019, October 03). Retrieved November 03, 2020, from https://www.fcc.gov/restoring-internet-freedom
Wu, Tim, Network Neutrality, Broadband Discrimination. Journal of Telecommunications and 	High Technology Law, Vol. 2, p. 141, 2003, Available at SSRN: 	https://ssrn.com/abstract=388863 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.388863
